# Cyanide
Since cyanide (CN) causes significant morbidity and mortality, not only to civilian victims,
but also to firefighters, we need to make this topic a priority. Studies show that cyanide is 
present in the blood of most victims of structure fires, and case studies, such as the March 
2006 restaurant fire in Providence, Rhode Island, and studies conducted by the fire department
in Columbia, South Carolina, confirm that firefighters are exposed and affected by cyanide at
virtually every fire.

Hydrogen Cyanide (HCN) can be generated by burning synthetic materials such as acrylics,
polyurethane, nylon, and plastics, as well as natural materials such as wool, silk, cotton,
paper, and wood. Basically, any material that contains nitrogen or carbon. When we inhale
smoke, or absorb the chemical from the soot on our skin, we can be severely injured and die.

Cyanide causes a condition called histotoxic hypoxia. The cyanide ion halts cellular
respiration by inhibiting an enzyme in the mitochondria called cytochrome c oxidase. This
prevents the cell from using oxygen from the bloodstream, despite physiologically normal
delivery of oxygen to the cell. When this happens, the cell is prevented from producing 
vital amounts of Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP).

Think of ATP as the molecular unit of currency. When we can no longer produce “currency”,
our cell goes “bankrupt” or dies. Cardiovascular and neurological tissue is very quickly 
affected by a lack of energy. Even mild exposure to cyanide can cause fatigue, headaches,
confusion and loss of judgment.

Think about it? Have you ever had a headache after fighting a fire?

The Immediately Dangerous to Health and Life (IDHL) level for cyanide is only 50 parts per 
million (ppm). To put this in perspective, carbon monoxide (CO), an extremely dangerous
chemical, has an IDHL of 1200 ppm. However, do not underestimate CO. When we combine cyanide 
and CO, we refer to it as the “Toxic Twins.” They work synergistically to kill us, by 
reducing the bloods oxygen carrying capacity, and preventing any oxygen that does manage 
to reach cells to be used to create the energy we need to stay alive.

Confusion and loss of judgment can be an early sign of toxicity, and when engaged in 
firefighting, can also lead to fatal consequences such as disorientation and other 
poor-decision making skills that may affect the entire operation, including the lives of every
firefighter on that scene.

Food for thought, we need to don SCBA far away from the fire building. The Columbia Fire 
Department measured cyanide levels at 38ppm at the front door of the house where their guys
were donning their mask. If we have been in the service for a while, we have all done this,
too! Let’s take this lesson and implement a change, now.

Experts suggest that cyanide poisoning should be suspected in “any person exposed to smoke 
in a closed-spaced fire, regardless if burns have been sustained. Soot in the mouth or nose,
altered consciousness, and the presence of hypotension increases confidence in the diagnosis”
of cyanide poisoning. If one of your firefighters is exhibiting signs of moderate to severe
cyanide toxicity, treatment should be based on an empiric approach, which means to treat for
it even if it is only suspected, not yet confirmed. In other words, if we have a presumptive 
diagnosis, aggressively treat the firefighter. This includes the standard resuscitation bundle
and hydroxocobalamin, also known as the Cyanokit.

Hydroxocobalamin is different from the more commonly known Cyanide Antidote Kit (also known 
as the Lilly, Taylor, or Pasadena kit) which consists of three medications – amyl nitrite, 
sodium nitrite, and sodium thiosulfate. These medications are known to be difficult to 
administer in the field and have a poor risk:benefit ratio, often times resulting in severe 
hypotension and a shift in the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. It is also contraindicated 
in carbon monoxide posisoning, which we can suspect in any of our victims. 

On the other hand, hydroxocobalamin is a safe and effective antidote that is suitable for the 
treatment of cyanide poisoning in the pre-hospital setting that does not compromising the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and does not cause hypotension.

As a side note, hydroxocobalamin is actually associated with increases in blood pressure, which
are self-limiting and transient. There is some interesting research available on nitric oxide
scavenging of hydroxocobalamin which may account for its hemodynamic profile.

Hydroxocobalamin chelates the cyanide ion from the mitochondria, allowing the cell to start
using oxygen in energy production. Cyanide and hydroxocobalamin form cyanocobalamin, or 
Vitamin B12, which is excreted in urine.

These are key components in treating one of our own affected by cyanide poisoning. It is best
to administer hydroxocobalamin as soon as possible in the pre-hospital setting, if indicated,
in conjunction with a comprehensive resuscitation bundle.

Conclusion

Suggested link

# References
